SIMD-0170: Reserve minimal CUs for builtins (#170)
solana-foundation/solana-improvement-documents: proposals/simd-0170-builtin-instruction-cost-and-budget.md

authors:
  - Tao Zhu (Anza)
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Draft
created: 2024-08-26
feature: https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/issues/2562
supersedes: 
superseded-by:
extends:
---

## Summary

Builtin instructions always consume a statically defined amount of compute
units (CUs). Therefore, they should allocate the exact same amount of compute
budget and count the same amount toward the block limit during the banking
stage.

## Motivation

Builtin instructions in the SVM consume their static DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNITS from
the compute budget during execution. These DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNITS are also
counted against block limits during the banking stage. However, historically,
builtin instructions have been allocated DEFAULT_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT
units of compute budget. This discrepancy between the allowed consumption and
the actual usage tracked for block limits has led to several issues that need
to be addressed.

Allocating DEFAULT_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT instead of the actual
DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNITS for builtin instructions distorts the tracking of
transaction compute budgets. This can result in more expensive instructions

> being executed when they should fail due to exceeding the budget. Consequently,

Author: Good question, I should word it more clearly. The issue is if block packer reserves `150` cu for `transfer`, but CU meter is allocateed `200_000` for it, the following BPF ix can take additional `199_850` CU without burst CU meter, that'd make block packer to adjust *up* `199_850` CUs. Adjust-up is considered bug.

In case of two BPF ixs, both block packer and CU meter see `400_000` CUs, so even 2nd ix can take advantage of left-over CUs from 1st, there wouldn't be case of adjust-up.

> being executed when they should fail due to exceeding the budget. Consequently,

Reviewer: Okay gotcha, thanks, that makes sense! So by allocating `ALLOCATE_COMPUTE_UNITS` instead of `200_000`, in the case where `ALLOCATE_COMPUTE_UNITS` > `EXECUTE_COMPUTE_UNITS`, is there still an adjust-up between `ALLOCATE_COMPUTE_UNITS` and `EXECUTE_COMPUTE_UNITS`?

> being executed when they should fail due to exceeding the budget. Consequently,

Author: In that case, BPF instruction can still consume the left-over CUs (eg, up to `ALLOCATE_COMPUTE_UNITS` - total executed ); but since block producer should reserved `ALLOCATE_COMPUTE_UNITS` for builtin, and default 200K for BPF instruction, which is the same CUs allocated for compute-budget for VM, the most CUs combined instructions can consume is the sum of `ALLOCATE_COMPUTE_UNITS` and `200K`, so there can't be adjust-up.

2. **Treat built-ins like regular instructions**: Another approach would be to
   allocate DEFAULT_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT for built-ins as for other
instructions. However, this fails to address over-allocation. Unlike regular
instructions, the execution of built-ins is more predictable and usually
requires significantly fewer CUs than BPF instructions. This approach would
allocate more CUs than necessary, undermining the goal of efficient CU usage.

3. **Declare both max and default CU values for built-ins**: A more precise
   approach would be to require built-ins to declare both a maximum CU
allocation (MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT) and a default CU value
for each instruction (DEFAULT_BUILTIN_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNITS). This would
allow fine-tuned CU allocation based on each instruction’s potential execution
path. However, this introduces new constraints for existing and future
built-ins, requiring updates to comply with these rules, which could
overcomplicate the design.

## Detailed Design

1. **Statically define CUs per instruction**: Assign a fixed CU consumption
   (DEFAULT_BUILTIN_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNITS) to each built-in instruction

> rather than per built-in program.

Reviewer: So to be totally clear, the transaction CU meter (VM) will consume `CU[ix]`, where `ix` is the instruction invoked. Meanwhile, the producer will allocate static `M` for any top-level builtin instruction. Is that correct?

Author: Exactly! 

Taking `CreateLookupTable` as example, itself consumes `750` CU, it also CPIs up to 3 `System` instructions, each consumes `150` CUs. 

Both producer and CU Meter will allocate `5,000` CU for it to start with. Invoking `CreateLookupTable` itself takes `750` out of `5,000`, then each time `System` is invoked, `150` is taken out from remaining of `5,000 - 750`.

Reviewer 2: Could we explain this in the SIMD? This wasn't clear to me upon first glance either.

> 2. **Set a static maximum CU allocation**: Propose a global limit of 5,000 CUs

Author: `5000` is based on existing builtins. AddressLookupTable's `CreateLookupTable` makes most CPI calls (up to 3 calls to `System`), that results up to `750 + 3*150 = 1200 CU`; Upgradeable Loader's `ExtendProgram` may CPI `System` once, in that case it'd need `2370 + 150 = 2520 CU`, which is the highest of all existing builtins. `5000` nearly doubles that, to leave room for future builtins.

Reviewer: Is the `5000` figure enough to increase block density by an adequately significant margin? Or should it be tighter? Seems like this would be a pretty dramatic improvement, right?

Author: Yes, the `5,000` yields a good result so far. 

In testing, I looked at 3 metrics: 
1. Should have zero case of "adjust-up" at producer side, and
2. Produced blocks should be (nearly) full, and
3. Count of transaction retries (due to "would-exceed-limits") should not be too high (indicating not over allocating);

Compare to original `200,000`, setting builtin allocation to `5000` on both producer and CU meter have a good result: no adjust-up, blocks are always (near) full, and number of retries were up very slightly. 

Setting it tighter to `3,000` didn't make too much improvements from `5,000`.

execution, potentially causing block limits to be exceeded.

   Furthermore, builtins can conditionally CPI into other programs, introducing
variability in CU consumption. This unpredictability makes it difficult to
allocate CUs upfront solely based on CUs builtin consumes during execution, also
adds complexity to the tracking process.

2. Preventing over-allocation of CUs: Over-allocating CUs for builtins
   reduces block density, lowers network throughput, and can degrade block
producer performance by causing repeated transaction retries. Avoiding excessive
CU allocation is critical for maximizing block efficiency and minimizing network
delays.

To resolve these issues, we propose statically defining the CU cost of builtin
instructions based on worst-case scenarios, including potential CPI calls. A
unified MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT will standardize CU allocation
for both block producers and the CU meter.

## New Terminology

None

## Detailed Design

1. Statically define CUs per instruction: Assign a fixed CU consumption
   (DEFAULT_BUILTIN_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNITS) to each builtin instruction

> rather than per builtin program.

Reviewer 2: Could we document that when a builtin instruction is invoked by VM, the `DEFAULT_BUILTIN_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNITS` is deducted from CU Meter?

Reviewer 2: Could we also specify the values that each `DEFAULT_BUILTIN_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNITS` will take? And ideally the justification for these.

2. Set a static maximum CU allocation: Propose a global limit of 5,000 CUs
   (MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT) to cover worst-case scenarios,

> including CPI operations.

Reviewer 2: Could we explain that:

- `MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT` is the same for each builtin program instruction
- `MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT` is used to allocate the CU meter and set the block producer limits

Reviewer 2: Could we document what value `MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT` will take, and the data used to derive this?

Author: aa70ccf9d061eabb282c3846a5d60a12a506325c

small (mostly) static execution compute unit cost. The runtime will only release
the over-allocated compute units from the block cost tracker when transaction
execution finishes and the actual consume compute units is known.

Over-allocating CUs for builtin program instructions reduces block density,
lowers network throughput, and can degrade block producer performance by causing
repeated transaction retries (due to repeatedly over allocating cu's and then
releasing them after execution). Avoiding excessive CU allocation is critical
for maximizing block efficiency and minimizing network delays.

## New Terminology

None

## Detailed Design

Establish a static maximum allocation of 3,000 CU's for builtin programs denoted
as `MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT`, which is larger than all actual
compute unit costs of builtin programs as well as the potential Cross-Program
Invocations (CPIs) they do. This uniform limit is applied to each builtin
program instruction and is used to configure both CU meter allocations and block
producer CU limits reservation for all builtin instructions.

The static list of builtin program id's that will have 3000 compute units

> allocated are:

Reviewer: Can you add a line here that also states the builtin must be owned by the native loader for this CU allocation to apply? Avoids any footguns when they move to BPF.

Reviewer: The list can still be static, we just also want that explicit requirement.

Author: added in 0e6e0caa2d35a915ae2455dadf66a4ad8c1e8ae6

Reviewer 3: I think we should update this list of builtin program id's when each of the builtin-to-bpf feature gates are activated. We're not going to check the owner of the builtin program each time during cost calculation.

Reviewer: Works for me, as long as an ID can be popped out on feature activation.

Reviewer 3: Yup, @tao-stones please make sure @buffalojoec gets added as a reviewer on your impl pr

Author: yep, will do

number of compute units needed for executing builtin programs which have a
small (mostly) static execution compute unit cost. The runtime will only release
the over-allocated compute units from the block cost tracker when transaction
execution finishes and the actual consume compute units is known.

Over-allocating CUs for builtin program instructions reduces block density,
lowers network throughput, and can degrade block producer performance by causing
repeated transaction retries (due to repeatedly over allocating cu's and then
releasing them after execution). Avoiding excessive CU allocation is critical
for maximizing block efficiency and minimizing network delays.

## New Terminology

None

## Detailed Design

Establish a static maximum allocation of 3,000 CU's for builtin programs denoted
as `MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT`, which is larger than all actual
compute unit costs of builtin programs as well as the potential Cross-Program
Invocations (CPIs) they do. This uniform limit is applied to each builtin
program instruction and is used to configure both CU meter allocations and block
producer CU limits reservation for all builtin instructions.

> The static list of builtin program id's that will have 3,000 compute units
> allocated are listed below, note that the builtins must be owned by the native
> loader.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The static list of builtin program id's that will have 3,000 compute units
allocated are listed below, note that when builtins are migrated to sBPF
programs, they MUST be removed from this list and have the default 200k
compute units allocated instead.
```

---
simd: '0170'
title: Specifying CU Definitions for Builtins
authors:
  - Tao Zhu (Anza)
category: Standard
type: Core
status: Review
created: 2024-08-26
feature: https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/issues/2562
supersedes: 
superseded-by:
extends:
---

## Summary

1. Builtin programs should consume a predefined number of CUs for each
   instruction.
2. Since builtins can invoke other programs (CPI), they should allocate enough

>    but granular CUs to ensure successful execution without over-allocation.

Reviewer 3: Let's simplify this to something like "If a transaction doesn't define a compute budget limit, then for each builtin program instruction allocate 3000 compute units rather than 200,000."

## Motivation

This proposal addresses two key issues related to CU allocation and consumption
for builtin programs while aiming to avoid adding unnecessary complexity.

1. Accurate CU tracking without post-execution adjust-up: Currently,
   builtin instructions deduct a fixed amount of CUs (DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNITS)
from both the CU meter and block limits after execution. However, the CU meter
allocates a much larger value (DEFAULT_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT) to each
builtin instruction. This discrepancy creates imprecise CU tracking and may
require block producers to account for additional CUs after a transaction's
execution, potentially causing block limits to be exceeded.

   Furthermore, builtins can conditionally CPI into other programs, introducing
variability in CU consumption. This unpredictability makes it difficult to
allocate CUs upfront solely based on CUs builtin consumes during execution, also

> adds complexity to the tracking process.

Reviewer 3: This is basically just an agave scheduler bug which isn't subject to consensus rules. Let's remove this section from the SIMD and just keep the 2nd point.

2. Preventing over-allocation of CUs: Over-allocating CUs for builtins
   reduces block density, lowers network throughput, and can degrade block
producer performance by causing repeated transaction retries. Avoiding excessive
CU allocation is critical for maximizing block efficiency and minimizing network
delays.

To resolve these issues, we propose statically defining the CU cost of builtin
instructions based on worst-case scenarios, including potential CPI calls. A
unified MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT will standardize CU allocation
for both block producers and the CU meter.

## New Terminology

None

## Detailed Design

1. Retain the existing DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNITS for builtin programs.
   When the virtual machine (VM) invokes a builtin instruction, the
statically defined DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNITS is consistently deducted from the CU

> Meter.

Reviewer 3: Let's leave this out of this SIMD because it's existing behavior which isn't changing. I think if firedancer is interested in how this existing behavior works, we can detail it in the follow up SIMD that @tao-stones will be writing for per-ix cu costs.

accommodate worst-case execution scenarios, including potential Cross-Program
Invocations (CPIs). This uniform limit is applied to each builtin program
instruction and is used to configure both CU meter allocations and block
producer CU limits reservation for all builtin instructions.

The 3,000 CU threshold is based on analysis of current built-in programs and
reflects the unlikely need for additional complexity. For instance, the
`AddressLookupTable`’s `CreateLookupTable` performs the highest number of CPI
calls (up to three invocations of the System program), resulting in a maximum
CU demand of 1,200 CUs (750 + 3 × 150). Similarly, `UpgradeableLoader`’s
`ExtendProgram`, which may invoke the System program once, requires up to
2,520 CUs (2,370 + 150), representing the most resource-intensive operation
among current built-ins. The proposed 3,000 CU limit slightly exceeds this
requirement, allowing for controlled flexibility without an excessive margin.

3. Handling invalid CU requests: Transactions will fail if they request:
   - More than MAX_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT per transaction, or
   - Less than the sum of all included builtin instructions'

>      MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT

Reviewer 3: I think this can also be pulled out and solved in a separate SIMD

instructions. However, this fails to address over-allocation. Unlike regular
instructions, the execution of builtins is more predictable and usually
requires significantly fewer CUs than BPF instructions. This approach would
allocate more CUs than necessary, undermining the goal of efficient CU usage.

3. Declare both max and default CU values for builtins: A more precise
   approach would be to require builtins to declare both a maximum CU
allocation (MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT) and a default CU value
for each instruction (DEFAULT_BUILTIN_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNITS). This would
allow fine-tuned CU allocation based on each instruction’s potential execution
path. However, this introduces new constraints for existing and future
builtins, requiring updates to comply with these rules, which could
overcomplicate the design.

## Impact

Users who previously relied on including builtin instructions, instead of
explicitly setting compute-unit limits, to allocate budget for their
transactions may experience an increase in transaction failures. To avoid this,
users are encouraged to use set_compute_unit_limit to explicitly request the

> necessary budget for their transactions.

Reviewer 3: If those impacted users have issues fitting in the set compute unit limit instruction into their transactions due to tx data size limits, they can also migrate to using address lookup tables to fit in the compute budget instruction call.

stage.

## Motivation

Builtin instructions in the SVM consume their static DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNITS from
the compute budget during execution. These DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNITS are also
counted against block limits during the banking stage. However, historically,
builtin instructions have been allocated DEFAULT_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT
units of compute budget. This discrepancy between the allowed consumption and
the actual usage tracked for block limits has led to several issues that need
to be addressed.

Allocating DEFAULT_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT instead of the actual
DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNITS for builtin instructions distorts the tracking of
transaction compute budgets. This can result in more expensive instructions
being executed when they should fail due to exceeding the budget. Consequently,
the cost tracker may need to account for additional compute units toward block
limits after transaction execution, potentially producing blocks that exceed
those limits.

Furthermore, maintaining consistency in transaction costs between the banking
stage and SVM would simplify the code logic and make reasoning more
straightforward.

> ## Alternatives Considered

Reviewer 4: If we were to take this approach of using static costs per builtin program, and alternative is to just fix the implementation of CU usage in execution.

If our cost-model says that builtin program Z always uses X CUs, then that should be what is actually used by the execution, regadless of what it does internally, including CPI.

Author: > If we were to take this approach of using static costs per builtin program, and alternative is to just fix the implementation of CU usage in execution.

Acknowledging that several alternatives exist, this proposal focuses on the specific issue: "If the VM must consume builtin.default_compute_units, then it should allocate exactly that amount for the builtin, rather than a fixed 200,000 units." This approach addresses block overpacking in the short term, while longer-term solutions are still being explored.

> If our cost-model says that builtin program Z always uses X CUs, 

To clarify, it's the cost model *being told* that a builtin program Z always uses X CUs.

> then that should be what is actually used by the execution, regadless of what it does internally, including CPI.

Yea,  that'd be ideal. I am not 100% how and when this will happen tho. Happy to discuss more.

Reviewer 4: (agave implementation specific)
I believe we'd need to modify the `declare_process_instruction` macro so that we can somehow have a call that doesn't consume CUs and one that does - either through some flag or separate call.
Calls from inside our builtins would then need to call the correct one that does not consume.
Would also need to make sure that actual user-code cannot call into the non-consuming version.

Reviewer: @apfitzge you can just provide zero and it becomes a no-op.
https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/a72f981370c3f566fc1becf024f3178da041547a/program-runtime/src/invoke_context.rs#L71-L76

A good standard would be to follow the [ZK proof program's instructions](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/master/programs/zk-token-proof/src/lib.rs#L186) (shared previously by @tao-stones). We would just need to sort out how to represent the constants to get some kind of builtin-program dictionary of CUs per instruction.

Reviewer 4: but then I think then it'd always consume 0, since it is a macro defining a function, not a function itself.

- One possible alternative approach would be to maintain the current allocation
of compute budget for builtin instructions but add logic to the cost tracker
to account for the discrepancy during tracking. However, this would add
complexity and could introduce additional corner cases, potentially leading to
more issues.

> - Another alternative would be to treat builtin instructions the same as other

Reviewer 4: there's already plans underway to move the builtins to bpf.

at that point it'd effectively be the same as this alternative since builtins would be treated the same as other user programs - (?) possible exception for compute-budget which is a configuration not an instruction (imo).

Thus we will need some way to address the over-reserving described here.
There have been discussions on ramping down the default ix CUs over time, what is the issue with such an approach now if it is eventually the path we have to take?

Author: Not sure if moving builtins to bpf solves the particular issue (mentioned above) this proposal aims in immediate term, cause still need to allocate "proper" budget for builtin, or any instruction in that scenario.

But lower default cu/ix will help - lowered default per ix will ease over reserving. What would the new "default" be is arbitrary. In extreme case, if it is lowered to `0`, we'd be in the ideal world that every transaction will have to set (in other words, configure) its cu limit.

Reviewer 4: right, but I think there's simplicity in saying "all programs are treated the same" vs "builtins are treated differently AND these specific builtin instructions are treated even different from that"

Author: Absolutely. to be at "all programs are treated the same" in terms of allocating budget for VM, it needs to shift to 100% request-based mode. More tools need to be built to help devs to request cu limits easily and accurately, also lower the default cu/ix when < 100% transaction requests cu limit. This proposal serves stopgap before all that land.

should always allocate the statically defined DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNITS for builtin
instructions, including compute-budget instructions.

   Currently, when set_compute_unit_limit is not used, all instructions are
allocated DEFAULT_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT, capped by the transaction's
MAX_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT. However, compute-budget instructions historically
haven't had any units allocated. This can lead to over-packed blocks in
certain scenarios.

   [Example 1](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/pull/2746/files#diff-c6c8658338536afbf59d65e9f66b71460e7403119ca76e51dc9125e1719f4f52R13403-R13429):
   A transaction consists of a Transfer and an expensive non-builtin instruction.
If the non-builtin instruction requires more than DEFAULT_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT
CUs, the over-budgeting for Transfer allows the expensive instruction to
execute to completion, forcing an upward adjustment.

   [Example 2](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/pull/2746/files#diff-c6c8658338536afbf59d65e9f66b71460e7403119ca76e51dc9125e1719f4f52R13431-R13455):
   A builtin instruction that might call other instructions (CPI) would fail

> without explicitly requesting more CUs. However, this isn't currently happening.

Reviewer 4: Under this proposal, this transaction would fail, right?

That seems to indicate to me that cost-model is broken for builtins (even with this proposal).
If we are claiming these builtins have known static costs, we should use those costs instead of creating a weird UX where some native/builtin instructions **require** the use of some other one.

In addition to this, why can we not fix the cost-tracking done in the VM?
If we are going to continue claiming in cost-model that some builtin program always uses X CUs, then that's what it should use - regardless of internal behavior which may CPI.

Author: > Under this proposal, this transaction would fail, right?

Yes, it'd fail under this proposal, kinda of intentionally.

> If we are claiming these builtins have known static costs, we should use those costs instead of creating a weird UX where some native/builtin instructions require the use of some other one.

Yea, builtins that CPI to other instructions is a tricky case, perhaps it can't be said to have a static cost, unless the number of CPIs are static. I don't have a good immediate solution for it, but asking/pushing for every transaction to explicitly call set_compute_unit_limit.

> In addition to this, why can we not fix the cost-tracking done in the VM?

To reduce confusion, let's use "cost tracking" for block packing side of business, and "budget consuming" when relates to VM takes CUs.

Reviewer: > In addition to this, why can we not fix the cost-tracking done in the VM?
> If we are going to continue claiming in cost-model that some builtin program always uses X CUs, then that's what it should use - regardless of internal behavior which may CPI.

Technically the VM is doing its designated job correctly, since the `InvokeContext` is created per-instruction, and it handles the accrual of CU usage across CPI stack frames.

I feel like the solution would have to be at the SVM (runtime) level, where we keep some list of builtin CUs that are reserved for each instruction. Something like this might do it (sorry, bunch of pseudo-code here).

```rust
// ALT program:
mod address_lookup_table_program {
    const CUS_BASE_CREATE_LOOKUP_TABLE: u64 = 750;
    const CUS_TOTAL_CREATE_LOOKUP_TABLE: u64 = 750 + 150 + 150; // Includes CPI to System.

    enum Instruction {
        CreateLookupTable,
        /* ... */
    }

    impl Instruction {
        fn get_cus_to_allocate(ix_data: &[u8]) -> BuiltinComputeUnits {
            match ix_data.first() {
                Some(&0) => CUS_TOTAL_CREATE_LOOKUP_TABLE,
                /* ... */
            }
        }
    }

    // Processor for `CreateLookupTable`:
    fn process_create_lookup_table(/* ... */) {
        // Base CUs. CPIs will consume their corresponding base CUs.
        consume_cus(CUS_BASE_CREATE_LOOKUP_TABLE);
    }
}

// SVM:
fn process_tx(tx: SVMTransaction, /* ... */) {
    let cus_to_allocate = tx
        .instructions()
        .iter()
        .map(|ix| {
            if ix.program_id == address_lookup_table_program::id() {
                address_lookup_table_program::Instruction::get_cus_to_allocate(ix.data)
            }
            // Default allocation 200k.
            200_000
        })
        .sum();
    allocate_cus_for_transaction(cus_to_allocate);
}
```

Author: There's possibility "builtin instruction" can be deprecated all together. But if it stays, then allocating budget by builtin "instructions" not by "program" would be next step. ZK program [consumes CUs by instruction](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/master/programs/zk-token-proof/src/lib.rs#L186), not by program_id.

Reviewer: > ZK program [consumes CUs by instruction](https://github.com/anza-xyz/agave/blob/master/programs/zk-token-proof/src/lib.rs#L186), not by program_id.

Awesome! I'm in favor.

    its instructions (similar to how ZK programs do it).
    - Each instruction will also expose its MAX_COMPUTE_UNIT, which represents
    the worst-case scenario. This MAX_COMPUTE_UNIT accounts for any variation,
    such as the instruction calling (CPI-ing) other instructions based on input
    data or account states. It must be equal to or greater than the
    DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNIT.
    - This makes builtin programs more transparent about their compute usage.
    During execution, the runtime will use the DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNIT to track
    actual compute usage, while MAX_COMPUTE_UNIT will be used to allocate the
    compute budget.

  1.2 Changes to Builtin-Default-Costs Crate:

    Instead of the current dictionary of [builtin program, DEFAULT_COMPUTE_UNIT],
    a new dictionary will be created with [instruction, MAX_COMPUTE_UNIT].
    This will allow the system to accurately calculate compute allocation for
    each instruction, factoring in its potential CPIs.

  1.3 Call-Site Implementation:

    - Instruction Type Lookup: At the call-site (e.g., in the compute budget or
    cost model), the type of builtin instruction will be determined.

>     - If the instruction type cannot be identified, a small number of CUs will

Author: "charging small amount of CUs" for basic works done on transaction, is a change apply to all transaction that'd fail during sanitization, or before VM execution. It is beyond this proposal.

for builtin programs while aiming to avoid adding unnecessary complexity.

- Preventing over-allocation of CUs: Over-allocating CUs for builtins
   reduces block density, lowers network throughput, and can degrade block
producer performance by causing repeated transaction retries. Avoiding excessive
CU allocation is critical for maximizing block efficiency and minimizing network
delays.

To resolve this issue, we propose statically defining the CU reservation of
builtin instructions based on worst-case scenarios, including potential CPI
calls. A unified MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT will standardize CU
allocation for both block producers and the CU meter.

## New Terminology

None

## Detailed Design

Establish a static maximum CU allocation: Define a global compute unit limit
of 3,000 CUs, denoted as MAX_BUILTIN_ALLOCATION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT, to
accommodate worst-case execution scenarios, including potential Cross-Program
Invocations (CPIs). This uniform limit is applied to each builtin program
instruction and is used to configure both CU meter allocations and block
producer CU limits reservation for all builtin instructions.

> 

Reviewer 3: The static list of builtin program id's that will have 3000 compute units allocated are:
- `Stake11111111111111111111111111111111111111`
- `Config1111111111111111111111111111111111111`
- `Vote111111111111111111111111111111111111111`
- `11111111111111111111111111111111`
- `ComputeBudget111111111111111111111111111111`
- `AddressLookupTab1e1111111111111111111111111`
- `BPFLoaderUpgradeab1e11111111111111111111111`
- `BPFLoader1111111111111111111111111111111111`
- `BPFLoader2111111111111111111111111111111111`
- `LoaderV411111111111111111111111111111111111`
- `KeccakSecp256k11111111111111111111111111111`
- `Ed25519SigVerify111111111111111111111111111`

Note that there are a few builtin programs not in the list including the upcoming zk programs as well as the feature program.

reflects the unlikely need for additional complexity. For instance, the
`AddressLookupTable`’s `CreateLookupTable` performs the highest number of CPI
calls (up to three invocations of the System program), resulting in a maximum
CU demand of 1,200 CUs (750 + 3 × 150). Similarly, `UpgradeableLoader`’s
`ExtendProgram`, which may invoke the System program once, requires up to
2,520 CUs (2,370 + 150), representing the most resource-intensive operation
among current built-ins. The proposed 3,000 CU limit slightly exceeds this
requirement, allowing for controlled flexibility without an excessive margin.

If a transaction consists only of builtins, no explicit CU request should be
required. If a CU request is made, the requested limit will override the max
allocation in #2.

## Alternatives Considered

1. Treat builtins like regular instructions: Another approach would be to
   allocate DEFAULT_INSTRUCTION_COMPUTE_UNIT_LIMIT for builtins as for other
instructions. However, this fails to address over-allocation. Unlike regular
instructions, the execution of builtins is more predictable and usually
requires significantly fewer CUs than BPF instructions. This approach would

> allocate more CUs than necessary, undermining the goal of efficient CU usage.

Reviewer 3: 1. Do nothing and continue allocating 200k compute unit's for all non-compute budget instructions. However, this fails to address over-allocation. Unlike regular instructions, the execution of builtins is more predictable and usually requires significantly fewer CUs than BPF instructions. This approach would allocate more CUs than necessary, undermining the goal of efficient CU usage.
